The amount that went to each of them was not readily
identifiable by anybody at the legislative
level, but of course it was internally because of
the way we put the budgets together with Dean
Benson. And before he retired, we did change our
budget structure, so we separated the two and each
of us go in with our own budget request like each of
our other system partners now. And then when Mr.
Rutter dies in early 1970, Jack Williams comes in
later that year, John Calhoun as vice president,
did TTI's role change under them? Not really. We
still, let's see, I guess Fred was what he was...
vice president for engineering he carried
several titles during this period of time and we
still reported through Fred even to Calhoun and
then later to Calhoun himself under a different
structure I've got a list of all the different
people that I've reported to and I think there were
17 different ones on that list of fellows of who we
have really reported to. But anyway, there is a
bunch of turnover in the system and in university
as well. We've reported both ways from time to
time. Fred had always been a supporter, of course.
And even after he became dean and Jack Case was
director, all budget matters went through Fred.
We went in with the joint budget of TTI, and civil
engineering because he was responsible for all of
those. And he made the final decisions, or at least
asked questions such that you made the decision
the way he would like to have it made, I think, in
most of those cases. Did any key campus
administrator in your memory ever question the
importance of TTI?
I know I can't immediately say, yes, it was Joe
Smith that did this, but that we have had the
question raised, and I don't know at what level or
really the background behind it, but why should we
be devoting particularly prior to this last
legislative session, particularly to campus
facilities, to an organization that really has no
academic teaching responsibilities. And it's
never been made a major issue. But up until the last
session of the legislature, it was always sort of a
little burr under the saddle there. Now, of
course, we are getting appropriations directly
to offset those, and it's a pass-through. We get
the appropriation and pass it through to the
university for facilities and maintenance and
upkeep and all those sorts of things. All right.
Today, TTI reports to whom? Today, the director
reports directly to the chancellor. No to the
minute they may have changed that.
I think that I think that now and this has been
quite. and I'm sorry to be vague on this, but I've
been out of it now for a little while. I think now
it's reporting to our vice president for
engineering, which is also head of the T's. You
mean vice chancellor? Vice chancellor, yeah.
When did it become then a system component instead
of a campus component? It was a system component in
1950. Oh, so it always was. Always has been. Oh,
okay. All right. Now, there were questions raised
about that as to whether the board could
officially designate, which they had done, could
officially designate and create a system
component for that action of the legislature. And
that was resolved back in the 80s. Looking back,
let's see, trace the directors who, after Keyes,
who? Me. And you, what year? Well, Jack Keyes had a
heart attack in the fall of 1975. I took over. Fred
called me in and said, Jack's going to be out a year
sort of helping run the place now. Do you want to
continue doing that, and do you want me to change
your title to interim director or something like
that and i said the current title is fine i'm
associate director at the time i didn't do
everything i could do as interim i mean associate
that i don't see any point in changes okay we'll
just wait and change it in the next budget cycle so
officially it was the uh then the beginning fall of
76 until 93 had 17 years During those years,
summarize how the employee workforce and the
budget went from what to what. We started out,
during those years, we had begun growing. And
when I started my tenure as director, we probably
had a budget of about $10 million a year, I would
assume. uh when i retired we were at 39 million i
believe so we agree we had a rather fast growth
spurt uh primarily because opportunities were
there and nothing brilliantly that i did to make
that happen it's just that we had a bunch of good
people and we had some good opportunities to to to
get into some new areas that were growing areas
such that we've had to accommodate a number of our
people in off-campus lease space over the years.
In fact, our new building that we just got built out
here now, we took 34,000 square feet of lease space
that moved all those people in this building out in
the research park. So we were able to pay the
building out of the most good part of the building
cost out of that money we were paying for leases
outside, and we'll have a building that leads
through. So that's worked out very well. Of that,
in your, that $39 million, about what percentage
or what sum was private enterprise and what was
state appropriation? Okay, two different,
there's three different categories. Private
enterprise, that is the private sector, very
small. I'd say always in less than 10%. State
appropriations running from 10 to 12%, and the
rest of it all comes from other governmental
sources. The Federal Highway Department,
Federal Highway Administration, other states,
their own state. But you all have to compete for
that. Yes, that's all competitively bid contract
research work. So that in terms of state
appropriation, out of that $39-40 million, Four,
five, six million were? Up until I retired, the
biggest we'd ever gotten, I believe, was $1.2
million of state appropriated money. And the
employee workforce? It's about, well, our total,
the number that we use now, this is about 650 now.
But that includes about 250 students, about
equally split between undergraduate and
graduate students. most of them are majoring in?
Well, you'd think they'd be majoring in civil
engineering, but they're not. They're majoring
in practically everything. Computer science,
engineering's a big one, of course. We've got
economists, economics in there. We've got a
number of them from over in the social sciences. We
do a lot of work
in our roadside safety area about driver
behavior. workload, this whole issue of talking
on the frazzling telephone while you're driving
down the road or looking at the onboard computer
while you're driving down the road. So we have a
number of human factors to graduate and
undergraduate students as well. In your years as
the director, summarize some of the work that you
all did. Of all of the projects that you all did that
you were closely involved in, of which ones are you
most proud? I guess the first one, because it is so
visible and is so intense in a way, is our roadside
safety programs, where we have now developed
roadside safety appurtenances materials that
have saved literally thousands and tens of
thousands of lives and untold economic benefits.
We figured that about $7 billion worth of economic
costs have been saved by people not getting killed
and not getting seriously injured when they hit
guardrails or run off the road in areas that are
hitting one of the big overhead signpost
structures that we've made breakaway and have
treated safety. So we've been very proud of the
work that we've done and are still developing that
area, doing quite a bit of work. Another thing that
we're very proud of in that area is that we, that is
one of the few things that we've been able to take to
the private sector and have them, through
licensing agreements, we have licensed this
technology. They're building it, putting it out
on the roadway, and we get a very handsome royalty
from that. So the money gets recycled. So we get to
recycle the money. This year, last year, by the
way, that's what I do now is handle intellectual
property. So that's the one thing I can talk about
currently. But last year, we made, in royalty
payments, over $2.5 million off the oversight
safety program. So of the current budget, 5%?
Mm-hmm.
All right, other projects that you're very proud
to look back on and claim? I guess the other one
would be it's not quite as visible, but the work
that we've been doing and have become, I think,
international leaders in is in the materials
area, the roadway materials area more than
anything else. Here we're trying to incorporate
the chemical engineering profession into the
civil engineering work of how do you characterize
in a meaningful way the materials that you're
putting into the roadway but in recent years we
have found out that it's not only you know
asphaltic roadway things not only the asphalt
it's also the different kinds of aggregate you get
one aggregate that's got certain
characteristics it will interact in a horrible
way with material with other with another set of
characteristics so you have to be able to identify
not only what you're putting in and the physical
quality, but you have to get to the chemical
quality of the interfaces of those different
materials. And we've developed a lot of work in
recycling old materials to use them, and
sometimes they make even better roadways than you
would make out of the original raw materials. What
are the most interesting discoveries you all have
made in those materials? Which would be the most
surprising materials? I think the biggest one,
because it's the biggest use that's been made out
there, is in the asphalt area. And there, to
characterize and to try to overcome the
traditional... knowledge that everybody had
that asphalt was a single material and the fact
that if you took an eight physically we have always
characterized asphalt by a number uh if it has a
certain hardness and this is what they really go by
it goes but get an ac5 and ac10 and ac20 each of those
is a different hardness of asphalt and that means
that it'll go through a tube under a certain set of
temperatures and then a certain speed And if it's
an AC-5, then you put it with these things. But what
we've really found is that's not the case. That's
not the problem that we're solving. We're trying
to do it with physical measurements, and we have to
do it with better measurements than we've ever
done before. Because even though the Romans were
able to build roadways that lasted forever,
practically, they built it in a way that we can't
afford to build them now. The Europeans are
building roadways that are much better than we're
doing because they have developed and again a very
expensive process but one that lasts a long time
it's a very good system where they contact
aggregate on aggregate contact on larger
aggregates and as long as you have the load bearing
on a set of aggregates that are contacting another
aggregate rather than a soft piece of asphalt it's
not going to rut or ravel out like the other
materials do we've not got it all incorporated
into the construction processes, but not
everybody, not all of the states really believe it
yet. That's one of the things that's going to be, I
think, a big lifesaver, because it's a money
saver. All right, now let's go to the other
extreme. Among the most frustrating efforts
y'all have been involved in.
Getting acceptance, I guess, of some of the human
factors considerations in transportation. The
whole issue of trying to marry technology with the
ability of the human and its ability to assimilate
and accumulate the knowledge that has been
presented to them. Traditionally, you as a driver
or I as a driver of an automobile going down the
roadway, we're focused on The roadway itself, the
oncoming vehicles, the conditions, whether it's
raining or dry or whatever, but we're conditioned
on a fairly narrow set of outside influences that
we have to deal with. Now, you put an onboard
computer in that's going to do all this marvelous
stuff for you if you're lost and tell you where you
are and how to get back to where you are. and give you
a cell phone at the same time. I just saw an
announcement or a statistic yesterday of a study
that was done, I've forgotten exactly what it was
now, but if you're using a cell phone in an
automobile, your probability of being involved
in a serious accident is 400% of what you would have
without that. We've been believing that for a long
time, And they've been involved in trying to get
this human factor overload, or human overload,
mental overload system recognized as a real
problem. And I think it's not only a problem in
automobile transportation, it's a problem in air
transportation as well. I think they've
recognized it a lot quicker than we have. Have
there been any proposals, requests, suggestions
to TTI that were truly goofy? Absolutely. Such as?
We get solutions to problems all the time. We had a
fellow from Houston that came up with a total set of
drawings, all of which he had stamped as very
private and confidential. really wanted us to
sign a confidentiality agreement before we would
look at them and we wouldn't do it. But when you
opened it up and looked at what he was proposing, he
was going to have a low friction transportation
system in the city of Houston. He was going to have
every roadway coming into the city of Houston
built at a downward angle. And he was going to have a
machine up here that built ice cubes And rather
than having rolling rubber tires, you would put
these ice cubes under your car and down that. And,
you know, what sort of a nut house did this guy come
out of? But those are, that's fairly extreme. But
we do get, I'm looking at one right now where a
fellow's got a new system for, he thinks, for the
trucking industry. That...
I think is a pipe dream of what he would like to do.
It's segmenting the delivery system for goods
movements. And what it ends up being is doing the
same thing we're doing now already, except it's
not patented materials. And so it's available to
everybody. Every Safeway store has a system of
moving from this warehouse to distributing their
goods. And they worked on it for a long time. 50
years to get it done right. You all have worked with
a lot of corporations. I'm not going to ask the
negative. Which corporations in TTI's work, to
which corporations would you give the highest
marks of excellence? I'd have to give it to Trinity
Industries, which is a local Texas organization.
And they are our primary licensee on our roadside
safety work. They've done an excellent job. They
partnered, they wanted to be partners with them.
We have to, if anything, we have to sort of push them
back and say, now we can't be that good a partner. I
mean, that's strong a partner because there are
certain things of competitive nature we have to
assure that we're being fair to everyone else. But
they have been a very good partner. They have
been... not only accepting of what we do, but
they've been participating and helping fund a lot
of the stuff that we do, and for which they then
compete for the license for. They do still have to
compete for the licensing. And have you all done
work for non-Texas, or is that not part of your
charter? Oh, yeah, we do work for non non Texas. In
fact, we do a lot a lot of work for other states.
A lot of safety work for other states.
We do a lot of federal work, not as much now as we did,
say five years ago. Because We have never really
gotten real good at the political process of
earmarking funds at the federal level. And in the
last two bills, that's been a really, really big
problem. They come out with a great big research
program and it's all earmarked. So much goes to
Idaho, so much goes to, you know, set up a recycling
center in, not in Connecticut, next state over.
Rhode Island? Yeah, Rhode Island. But where they
had no, they've had no experience at all in doing
any of that sort of work. But they've set them up
because of their strength of the political
processes in Washington. And we've not been very
good at that. Have there been any state or federal
elected officials that have been particularly
good friends of TTI?
State officials, yes, they have. Our own
officials have been very, very good to us. Are
there some that deserve special mention? Well, I
think that...
to the extent that they can, and some of them are not
in the positions yet to do so, that Ogden has been
very interested in the work that we've done.
Senator Steve Ogden. But go back in the past. Back
in the past, Ray Barnhart was a very strong
supporter. He became head of the Federal Highway
Administration. Of course, Tiger Tate and Jake
Pickle They were willing to support us and the
University of Texas as long as we didn't get one
really out of balance with the other. But Tiger was
always a good, strong supporter of TTI. Has it made
much difference in TTI's life whether there is a
Democrat or Republican governor in Texas?
Yes, it has. In recent years, I don't know how much
to say about this. Well, who's been most
supportive? We won't do the negative. The
Republican Party has been much more supportive of
the research program and of the overall need for
transportation research and
transportation-related work in the
transportation system. Now, Kay Bailey
Hutchison, Senator Hutchison at the federal
level, has been a good friend and... I mean, we
don't have a whole bunch of stuff sitting on our
desk of request, and Phil Graham has. To the extent
that Phil is not normally, Senator Graham is not
normally one who says, yes, I will go in and support
this, and regardless of the cost of the program,
you know, it's, well, I don't really like to put the
federal money in it, but if there's any that comes
into it, I'll sure try to see you get your share of it
sort of approach. All right, as you look back on all
these years, what were your proudest, with TTI,
what were your proudest moments?
Mostly I think it's been things
that other people have done, really, that have
been associated with TTI. We've had some very,
very excellent people that have gotten awards for
activities that they've been involved in or
developments or research that they have done. We
have some aboard now, like we started the Center
for Aggregate Research. This is one of those areas
to talk about. And Dr. Dallas Little is a professor
of civil engineering and has been one of our
employees for 20-something years and is an
absolutely outstanding young man, or not young
man. Of course, to me, he's still a young man, but
he's done a great work. Dr. Hirsch, Teddy Hirsch,
has done some excellent work that's gotten some
real recognition on the work that he's done in the
roadside safety area. Developed the first
breakaway highway sign work that was a real killer
and was almost immediately adopted by the Federal
Highway Administration as a requirement on all
interstate roads. So we've had some really good
work done that I've been very proud that our people
have been involved in and they've done. If you were
looking back on all these years related to A&M,
whether with TTI or not, we're on the downhill
slope now. To whom would you feel greatest
appreciation? If everybody could walk in the room
from those years, whom would you want to thank
most? Obviously, one of the first ones would be
Fred Benson.
I always admired Fred's forthrightness and his
ability to cut to the heart of the matter and his
willingness to make decisions and stand by and
make decisions when It might be more convenient to
form a committee to make the decision for you. Of
course, in one of the cases when he hired me as
director, appointed to move me up as director,
his total interviewing process was, Jack Case is
gone, I'd like to be, you'd be the new director.
Would you like to have a job? And I said, yes, he
said, okay, we'll start it first. And that was, I
mean, we didn't go through a committee and didn't
have to have a whole lot of other people's input. He
knew what he wanted to do and how he wanted to do it
and was willing to do it on his own, on his own
responsibility. Today, we take six months. Don't
we? Haskell, we are killing ourselves. We are
absolutely killing ourselves. And the end result
is not as skillfully done. You're absolutely
right. What you get is, you may not want this, but in
my view, what we do, we form committees to go in. We
make the poor candidate come in and go through this
committee. What you're looking for is how many
negatives do you get. And if you don't like this and
you don't like that, pretty soon you get down to
somebody down here where nobody finds anything
they don't like about him, but there's nothing
really good about him either. They're
comparatively bland. They're right. It's
absolutely right. All right, other people that
you'd want to thank beyond Fred Benson? Well, of
course, the old-timers. Mr. Gilchrist, of
course, because of his longstanding...
involvement and leadership in this in this whole
area jack keese jack keese was a good leader jack
keese was a better leader he was he was a good
researcher but he was primarily a leader instead
of a researcher and i think he did his best work that
way so i never want to thank i want to thank him in
Well, of course, there's a whole bunch of other
people that I think have done an excellent job as
far as their involvement with TTI. But I'm
thinking about it up in the system and university
level, or university system level. Those are the
two primary ones. I'm sure I'm leaving out
somebody that I just can't think of at the moment.
And the chancellors from the time the system is
recreated with following William's heart
attack, which of those chancellors, I'm not going
to ask the negative ghetto, which of those
chancellors would you give the highest marks to?
We're talking about from roughly 77 to now. 77 to
the time I, yeah.
Now, right now, down to the point, I'm having a hard
time remembering who were the names. Well, Hubert
Mobley.
Frank Hubert was a good one. a supporter of ours,
and was trying to, I think he tried to be helpful in
every way he could. I mean, he was never anything
negative. I'm trying to think who after Mobley,
was there anybody between Mobley and Thompson?
I don't think so. Oh, okay. I've got my list in there
somewhere. But, and of course, I've always had a
high respect for Mobley. For Thompson, he did not
have a whole lot to do with TTI, but at the time he was
in there, he was a strong supporter of TTI. He
particularly liked that we were trying to do
something practical and helpful for the people
who were trying to serve in the state of Texas.